# Group Session 4.sep 2024

## Theory

Enabledness:
- a statement is enabled in a state if the statement can in principle be executed next

Unconditional fair: 
- Scheduling strategy that guarantees that each unconditional atomic action will eventually be chosen

Weak fair scheduling: 
- unconditional fair  
- every conditional atomic action will eventually be chosen, assuming that the condition becomes true and remains true until the action is executed.

Weak fairness ensures that if a process is enabled and remains enabled, it must eventually execute.

Strongly fair scheduling:
- unconditional fair 
- every conditional atomic action will be chosen if the condition is infinitely often enabled. 


Strong fairness ensures that if a process is enabled infinitely often, it must eventually execute.

Mutual Exclusion: 
- At any time, there is only one process in the critical section 

Absence of deadlock: 
- If all processes are trying to enter the critical section, then at least one will succeed. 
- The program never "halts"

Absence of unnecessary delay: 
- If some processes are trying to enter CS, while the other
processes are in their non-critical sections, at least one will succeed.

Eventual entry: 
- A process that is trying to enter CS will eventually succeed. 


## Exercise 1 

```text
co
    <await (x>=3) x:=x-3> #P1
||
    <await (x>=2) x:=x-2> #P2
||
    <await (x=1) x:=x+5> #P3
oc
```

For which initial values of x does the program terminate (under weakly fair scheduling)? What are the corresponding final values?

X is a positive integer:

- x <= 0: Lower than 0, then all is blocking. No termination 
- x = 1: will start P3, and P2, P1 can execute at any order. Terminates 
- x = 2: will enter P2, and then x = 0. Then the other two will not terminate. No termination
- x = 3: May terminate. If enter P1 then it will not terminate (x will then be set be 0). If enter P2 it will terminate.
- x = 4; May terminate. 
- x = 5: No termination. X will be 0 after P1 and P2, and therefor will not execute P3
- x = 6: Always terminates. P1 and P2 will happen at any order and P3 will determinate. 
- x >= 7: Never terminate because x will always be greater than 1, so P3 will not happen. 

## Exercise 2

```text
co
    <await (x>0) x:= x-1> #P1
||
    <await (x<0) x:= x+2> #P2
||
    <await (x=0) x:=x+5> #P3
oc
```

For which initial values of x does the program terminate (under weakly fair scheduling)? What are the corresponding final values?

- x <= -2: Never terminate. 
- x = -1: Always terminate. Will be -1
- x = 0: Always terminates. Will be 0
- x = 1: Always terminate. Will be 1
- x >= 2: Never terminate 


## Exercise 3


### Part 1

```text
int x := 10;
bool c:= true; 

co 
    <await (x=0)>; c:=false #P1
||
    while(c) <x:=x-1> #p2
oc
```

Do we have:

1. Termination under weak fairness 

For the program to terminate, we need `c` to become false at one time. Weak fairness can guarantee that only if P1 is enabled at some point and stays enabled. The enabled condition is that `x=0`. In this case, we cannot assure that this is the case. If `x=0`, then there is a possibility of P2 running again. 

Therefor, the answer is that it might terminate. 

2. Termination under strong fairness

Strong fairness guarantees execution if the atomic statement can infinitely become true. This is not the case, because the program does not ensure that the P1 condition in infinity enabled at all times. It may terminate, but if it P1 skips entry and let P2 execute, then it will never terminate. 

Therefor, the answer is that it may terminate. 

### Part 2

Program is extended to: 

```text
int x := 10;
bool c:= true; 

co 
    <await (x=0)>; c:=false #P1
||
    while(c) <x:=x-1> #P2
||
    while(x) {if(x < 0) <x:=10>; } #P3
oc
```

1. Termination under weak fairness: 

With weak fairness again can only guarantee that it will terminate only if the process is enabled and stays enabled. P1 is disabled by two actions, P2 and P3. Again it could be lucky and terminate. 

It may terminate. 


2. Termination under strong fairness: 

With strong scheduling we know that P1 will terminate if the condition is infinity enabled and disabled. In this case it is. It will decrement until it hits the condition and then it will be reset to 10 if it becomes negative. This means that the condition is infinitely enable and strong fairness can therefor guarantee that in terminates. 

It will terminate

## Exercise 4

This is Dekker's algorithm

```text
bool enter1 := false; 
bool enter2 := true;
int turn := 1; 

process P1{
    while(true){
        enter1:=true
        while(enter2){
            if(turn = true){
                enter1 := false;
                while(turn = 2) skip;
                enter1 := true; 
            }
        }

        enter1 := false;
        turn := 2; 
    }
}


process P2{
    while(true){
        enter2 := true;
        while(enter1){
            if(turn = 1){
                enter2 := false; 
                while(turn = 1) skip;
                enter2 := true; 
            }
        }

        enter2:= true;
        turn := 1;
    }
}

```

Are the following properties met?: 

1. Mutual Exclusion:

To exclude the other process the entry of the process has to be true and the turn has to be its own number. When this is the case the other process will enter the while loop with the condition of entering. The process will not break out of this loop until the entry is set to false AND the turn is set to the current processes turn. This is only possible after the other process has finished the execution of the statements, that the other process can enter. 

Yes, there is mutual exclusion.


2. Absence of deadlock 

Deadlocks happens at both processes being stuck on a while loop. 

The first while loop is when both check the condition of the entry. If both sets this condition, then both enter the while loop and the turn will go to the process based on the `turn` variable. No deadlock here.

The second while loop for skipping when it is the other process turn. 
This turn variable can never be set to both. One process will be skipping, and then enter the critical section as the other one is exiting. Since they never can be stuck and turn is only modified as the last exit protocol statement, then there is no deadlock. 

Can they be at the two different while loops? No, because then one will be waiting for their turn and the other would wait for their entry, and that is not possible. Before the process will wait for the turn, it will open entry for the other. 

Yes, there is an absence of deadlock. (No deadlock)

3. Absence of unnecessary delay 

Absence of unnecessary delay, means that if one process is in its non-critical section and the other is, then at least one will succeed. 

Lets say that P1 is in the non-critical section. This can only happen if `enter1` is false. When this is the case P2 will go straight to the critical section.  

Yes, there is absence of unnecessary delay.

4. Eventual entry

Eventual entry means that both will enter the critical section. When both compete for entry, then they will wait on the inner loop. This inner loop is dependent on the turn variable which can either be 1 or 2. Then one will enter and set the turn to the other process. This will give the other process presidents over the last process. 

Every process will enter the critical section eventually.

5. How many times can P1, that wants to enter the critical section, be bypassed by P2 before the first gets in? 

A process can be bypassed at most once. Then both will depend on the turn variable. 


## Exercise 5


```text
int lock := 0; 

process CS[i=1 to n]{
    while(true){
        <await (lock = 0)>;
        lock := i; 
        while(lock != i){
            <await (lock = 0)>
            lock := i; 
        }

        // CS
        lock := 0; 
        // Non-CS
    }
}

```

1. Suppose the delay code is deleted. Are the following properties satisfied?

Mutual exclusion?

To be mutual exclusive then we need to ensure that only one process at the time can enter the critical section. Let say we start a process `CS1` and `CS2` is able to pass the first while loop. Then lets say that `CS1` is able to set lock to 1, and then checks the while loop. When `CS1` checks the while loop the lock is still 1 and it can enter the critical section. `CS2` does the same and is able to skip the mutual exclusion. To summarize: 
- Both `CS1` and `CS2` passes the atomic await lock for it to be 0
- `CS1` does then set lock and immediately pass the while statement and goes to critical section.
- `CS2` does then do the same. Set the lock and passes the while loop, and goes to critical section.
- Both has now entered the critical section

This means that it is not mutual exclusive.

Absence of deadlock?

If the following happens: 

- Three processes, `CS1, CS2, CS3`, all past first atomic statement.
- Both `CS1` and `CS2` goes to the inner atomic lock, and wait for the lock to be set to 0.
- The `CS3` sets now the lock and also goes to the inner 
- Now all processes are stuck on the inner atomic statement
- Program can no longer progress, because there are no more processes that can set lock to 0.

Absence of unnecessary delay?

There is no unnecessary delay, because when a process exits the CS, then the lock is set to 0. This means a process can directly go to the CS. 

Eventual entry?

This cannot be guaranteed. It is possible that one process continuously test and wait on the inner atomic statement. Then the process checks, another process enters and changes the lock. It may enter, but there is no guarantee that this happens. 


2. Now with delay: Suppose the Delay code spins for long enough to ensure that every process i that waits for lock to be 0 has time to execute the assignment statement that sets lock to i. Reconsider your answers under that circumstances.


```text
int lock := 0; 

process CS[i=1 to n]{
    while(true){
        <await (lock = 0)>;
        lock := i; 
        Delay; 
        while(lock != i){
            <await (lock = 0)>
            lock := i; 
            Delay;
        }

        // CS
        lock := 0; 
        // Non-CS
    }
}

```

Summary: 

The big difference is that each time reassignments happens after lock waited to be 0. This will lead to mutual exclusion, because some processes might go straight to CS while others will go in the inner while loop. The inner while loop will ensure that one will enter the critical section (the last process to assignment in the inner will pass the while loop and go to CS)


What about entry? Same problem. Because of scheduling there is no way to guarantee the order of assignment of the lock in an order such that there is an order of whom lock will last be assigned - i.e we cannot guarantee entry.


## Exercise 6 

Given this atomic flip function:

```text
# Single atomic action for flipping the lock
flip(lock)
    <lock:= (lock + 1) % 2 # Flip the lock
    return (lock);> # Return the new value 
```

And the following program: 

```text
int lock := 0;
process CS[i=1 to 2]{
    while(true){
        while(flip(lock) != 1){
            while(lock != 0) skip;
        }

        # CS
        lock := 0;
        # Non CS
    }
}
```

1. Spot the defect in the code, violating mutual exclusion. That is, give an execution order that results in both processes being in their critical sections at the same time.

- `CS1` goes through and flips the coin and goes straight to critical section. 
- Lock is 1
- `CS2` flips the lock to 0 and enters inner loop
- The problem is know the inner loop is jumped over, and `CS2` will again flip the coin. This time it will enter enter the critical section directly 

There is not mutual exclusion 


2. Suppose that the first line in the body of flip is changed to do addition modulo 3 instead of modulo 2. Will the solution now ensure mutual exclusion for two processes?

The new change will make the lock have three different states instead of two: 0, 1 or 2. 

With the new solution:  
- `CS1` goes through and flips the coin and goes straight to critical section. 
- Lock is 1
- `CS2` flips the lock to 2 and enters inner loop
- `CS2` now will skip until lock is reset to 0. 
- ONLY ONE IS IN CS 
- As `CS1` exits it will reset the lock to 0, and we start from scratch 

This ensures mutual exclusion. 

