# Group exercise 3 - Semaphores and Monitors 

## 1. (Semaphores: Precedence graph)

A precedence graph is a directed, acyclic graph. Nodes represent tasks, and arcs indicate the order in which tasks are to be accomplished. In particular, a task can execute as soon as all its predecessors have been completed. Assume that the tasks are processes and that each process has the following outline.

- 5 nodes. 
- T1 first
- T2 and T3 can run concurrently
- T4 must be after T2
- T5 must be after T4 and T3

Using semaphores, show how to synchronize five processes. Minimize the use of semaphores and do not impose other contains.

Solution: 

The first constraint is that T1 has to finish before T2 and T3 start. We can do this by having a single  semaphore called t1_done. We signal to this **twice** after T1 is done. We make both T2, and T3 wait on the t1_done semaphore. T1 does signal twice, which allows both T2 and T3 to run concurrently. 

Next constraint is that T2 have to signal T4 to wait. By having a semaphore that signals when T2 is done, then we can use that semaphore to make T4 wait before execution.

The last constraint is that can only execute after all other processes have executed. We can achieve this by making it wait on two semaphores. One for T3 and T4, after waiting on both, we are guaranteed that it will execute last. 

In total there is 4 semaphores needed, all with initial value 0. Here is the solution: 

```text

sem t1_done;
sem t2_done;
sem t3_done;
sem t4_done;

process T1{
    // SIGNAL ENTRY (non in this case)
    body of task;

    // Give two permits 
    V(t1_done);
    V(t1_done);
}


process T2{
    P(t1_done);
    body of task;
    V(t2_done);
}

process T3{
    P(t1_done);
    body of task;
    V(t3_done);
}


process T4{
    // Wait until t2 is done
    P(t2_done);
    body of task;
    V(t4_done);
}


process T5{
    // Wait on both t2 and t3 is done 
    P(t3_done);
    P(t4_done);
    body of task;
    // SIGNAL SUCCESS
}
```

## 2. (Semaphores: Bear and honeybees)

Given are **n** honeybees and a hungry bear. They share a pot of honey. The pot is initially empty; its capacity is **H** portions of honey. The bear sleeps until the pot is full, then eats all the honey and goes back to sleep. Each bee repeatedly gathers one portion of honey and puts it in the pot; the bee who fills the pot awakens the bear. Represent the bear and honeybees as processes and develop code that simulates their actions. Use semaphores for synchronization.

Summary: 

- N bees
- 1 bear
- One honeypot to share
- H capacity in the pot. 
- Bear only eats when pot is full
- Each bee put 1 portion into the pot, and bee to fill the portion will awake the bear


Solution: 

We use a semaphore as a mutex to access the pot, we treat pot as CS. 
Then we use a semaphore to wake up the bear. Each bee first requires the semaphore to increment the count 

```text
// Max capacity H
int H;

// Semaphore for pot is full
sem pot_full;

// Semaphore that acts as a mutex to access the pot and the capacity 
sem pot_mutex = 1;

// Counter for pot capacity 
int pot_count = 0;

process bee[i = 0, i to N]{
    P(pot_mutex);

    // Only if the pot has capacity we do something with the pot 
    if(pot_count < H){
        // Add 
        add honey;
        pot_count += 1;

        // Check if bear need to access pot
        if (pot_count = H){
            // Signal pot is full;
            V(pot_full);
        }
    }

    // Release pot mutex
    V(pot_mutex)
}

process bear{
    // Wait for pot to be full
    P(pot_full);

    // Get mutex of the pot 
    P(pot_mutex);

    bear eat all honey;
    pot_count = 0;
    bear sleep;
    
    // Release mutex 
    V(pot_mutex)
}
```

## 3. (Monitors: Signaling disciplines and SJN)

Consider the proposed solution to the shortest-job-next allocation problem:

```text
monitor Shortest_Job_Next{
    bool free := true;
    cond turn; 

    procedure request(int time){
        if (free = false){
            wait(turn, time);
        }
        
        free := false;
    }

    procedure release(){
        free := true;
        signal(turn);
    }

}
```


Note:
- wait() method for the procedure is implemented with a prioritized wait. The procedure with the least given time, will be woken up first.  

### Does this solution work correctly for the signal and continue discipline? 

Signal and Continue: Yes, it works, because the prioritized wait based on job time ensures that the shortest job gets access to the resource next, even if it doesn't run immediately after being signaled.


### Does it work correctly for signal and wait?

Signal and Wait: Yes, it works, and it guarantees immediate access to the shortest job after signaling, which is a strong guarantee, but not strictly necessary given the priority-based scheduling.

Both disciplines will work correctly for this monitor solution as long as the wait(turn, time) mechanism properly prioritizes threads by their job time!


TODO: CHECK WITH SOLUTION 

## 4. (Monitor solution to reader/writer problem)

In this program assume **signal and continue (sc)** discipline.


```text
monitor RW_Controller{
    // Invariant: (nr = 0 | nw = 0) & nw <=1

    int nr := 0; // Number of readers 
    int nw := 0; // Number of writers

    cond oktoread; // Signaled when nw = 0
    cond oktowrite; // Signaled when nr = 0 and nw = 0    


    procedure request_read(){
        while(nw > 0) wait(oktoread);
        nr := nr + 1;
    }

    procedure release_read(){
        nr:= nr - 1;

        // Wake up one writer 
        if (nr = 0){
            signal(oktowrite);
        }
    }

    procedure request_write(){
        while(nr > 0 & nw > 0) wait(oktowrite);
        nw := nw + 1;
    }

    procedure release_write(){
        nw := nw - 1;
        signal(oktowrite);
        signal_all(oktoread);
    }    
}

```


#### A: Modification signal_all to signal

In the monitor, the primitive signal all is used in release write(). Modify the monitor
so that it uses signal instead but still awakes all readers waiting on oktoread.


Solution (NOT VERIFIED): 

Loop over the queue while the queue is not empty.
Then signal a reader thread to start reading. 
This will work since we assume SC, which will make the signaler continue to wake up all oktoread threads until the queue is empty. All reader threads will therefore we woken up. 

```text
procedure release_write(){
    nw := nw - 1;

    signal(oktowrite);

    // Looping until it is empty
    while(!empty(oktoread)) {
        signal(oktoread);
    }
}

```

Solution (NOT VERIFIED):

The last solution has possibly a single problem. When the writer signals all waiting readers in a loop, it may miss a signaling and introduce overhead. The solution instead would be to signal a single reader, and then make all other readers signal another reader, if there is no active writer: 

```text
monitor RW_Controller{
    // Invariant: (nr = 0 | nw = 0) & nw <=1

    int nr := 0; // Number of readers 
    int nw := 0; // Number of writers

    cond oktoread; // Signaled when nw = 0
    cond oktowrite; // Signaled when nr = 0 and nw = 0    


    procedure request_read(){
        while(nw > 0) wait(oktoread);
        nr := nr + 1;
    }

    procedure release_read(){
        nr:= nr - 1;

        // Wake up one writer 
        if (nr = 0){
            signal(oktowrite);
        }
    }

    procedure request_write(){
        while(nr > 0 & nw > 0) wait(oktowrite);
        nw := nw + 1;
    }

    procedure release_write(){
        nw := nw - 1;
        signal(oktowrite);
        
        // Signal a reader, such that all readers are signaled
        signal(oktoread);
    }    
}
```


#### B: Make writer take precedence  

In the given monitor, readers take precedence over writers. Modify the monitor such that
writers take precedence over readers.

Solution: 

?

#### C: Access resource in turns

Modify the monitor so that readers and writers are allowed to access the resource in turns if both readers and writers want to access the resource.

Solution:

?


#### D: FCFS monitor 

Modify the monitor such that both readers and writers access the resource in a first-come-first-served (FCFS) manner. Allow more than one reader to access the resource as long as the FCFS-principle is satisfied. You may assume to have a (FIFO) queue q with the following operations:
- enqueue(q,X) returns q with the element X added at the end of the queue;
- dequeue(q) returns q with the first element removed;
- inspect(q) returns the first element of the queue without altering q;
- empty(q) returns true only when q is empty;
- an empty queue is declared by the statement queue q := empty.

Solution:
?

TODO: FINISH. 